Originally invented for the military sector in the 20th century, thermal imaging systems are an important part of today’s consumer and industrial measurement technology [1]. From the aspect of hardware components, a thermal imager is similar to a digital camera. But instead of a CCD or CMOS sensor, it does contain a sensor element able of detecting and measuring the long- wave infrared radiation, which is also called heat radiation. This kind of radiation is not visible for the human eye and therefore, a special device is required to perceive it. An infrared camera uses specific colour schemes to convert the measured infrared radiation to a so called thermal image. By using this method, cold temperatures can be for example mapped to the color blue and hot temperatures to the colour red, as it is the case for the so called “Rainbow” colour scale.
Although thermographic cameras have become less expensive in the last few years due to the increased amount of produced units as well as new sensor technologies like uncooled micro bolometers, they are still quite costly for a majority of the people. For this large target group, namely private persons, small companies and educational institutes or schools, a low-cost al- ternative was invented. The DIY-Thermocam, which stands for do-it-yourself thermographic camera, has the purpose to offer an open-source alternative to the commercial solutions on the market. The design of the device is modular, and it is offered as a self-assembly kit containing of over one-hundred components. The first version of the device (V1) was developed during a bachelor thesis at the university of applied science Ravensburg-Weingarten in late 2014. In the meantime, the device has been built over two-hundred times. The customers provided value feedback concerning improvements on the hardware and software side. This lead to the idea of inventing a new version of the device, with improved hardware and software capabilities.
As already mentioned in the introduction, thermal imagers have become more and more afford- able in the last decade, resulting from a price decline in the used infrared sensor technology. However, they are still not in the reach for everybody. The raw resolution of the thermal sensor has the biggest influence on the price. A low-end model like the FLIR E4 from Figure 1 with a thermal resolution of 80 x 60 pixel costs around 1000€. In the mid-range, a resolution of 160 x 120 pixel is common, which is what the DIY-Thermocam V2 offers. Comparable devices like the FLIR E6 cost around 2000€, what is far away from a cheap solution. In the upper range, resolutions of 320 x 240 or 640 x 480 are common, ranging from 5000€ to 30000€.
